# 24.04.2024 - Mittwoch

`/etc/services` is an important folder.

**cat** /etc/passwd

`-rwxr-xr-x root root /bin/ls`\
`drwxr-xr-x ozgur ozgur Downloads`

### Difference of x between Files and Folders <a href="#hkgd31ss3s6s" id="hkgd31ss3s6s"></a>

The “x” enables the folder to be reachable with cd command. Change into \[the Directory]

The “x” enables the files to be e**x**ecuted.

su -

mkdir /data

ls -l /

d<mark style="background-color:blue;">**rwx**</mark><mark style="background-color:red;">r-x</mark><mark style="background-color:green;">**r-x**</mark> <mark style="background-color:blue;">root</mark> <mark style="background-color:red;">root</mark> … data

<mark style="color:blue;">user (owner)</mark> <mark style="color:red;">group</mark> <mark style="color:green;">others</mark>

### id <a href="#rm9rhxr0dh4u" id="rm9rhxr0dh4u"></a>

shows the users with IDs.

### chmod (change modus) Berechtigung <a href="#qrguqcf7ec2u" id="qrguqcf7ec2u"></a>

u user

g group

o others

a all

**-** remove permission

**+** give permission

chmod o-x /data

If we run this command as root and want to access this folder with a different user, we will not be able to access this folder.

chmod o=rwx /data we are giving all privileges to /data for others.

### cp <a href="#vb75ll64rn9g" id="vb75ll64rn9g"></a>

cp \<source/Quelle> \<destination/Ziel>

cp /etc/services . copies /etc/services into the existing folder.

cp /etc/services serv1 copies to serv1.

### mv <a href="#g3nj2nyrzcj4" id="g3nj2nyrzcj4"></a>

move (verschieben || umbenennen)

mv serv1 s1

mv /data/file.txt **\~** moves the file under the given folder to the home folder of the user running the command.

### useradd <a href="#n5zt4sdhngab" id="n5zt4sdhngab"></a>

To add a user

#### /etc/default/useradd <a href="#id-6zy7girvk5ky" id="id-6zy7girvk5ky"></a>

nano /etc/default/useradd

This file contains the default settings for the users to be added.

#### useradd -m <a href="#uvgqbmxe69w6" id="uvgqbmxe69w6"></a>

\-m enables us to create a home folder for the user.

**useradd -m ali** The user ali is added with the home folder.

less /etc/passwd At the end we can see ali.

less /etc/group At the end we can see the group ali

User Ali does not have a password at the moment. Root needs to assign a password.

**passwd ali** A new password is set with the passwd command.

#### /etc/skel/ <a href="#gy0oug4nbg6" id="gy0oug4nbg6"></a>

We add all the files and folders that we want to be in the home folder of the newly created users.

ls -la **/etc/skel/**

### userdel <a href="#id-28wqfmcf1x4y" id="id-28wqfmcf1x4y"></a>

userdel ali to delete a user (home folder **is not deleted**)

#### userdel -r <a href="#ij01wgqbwl6j" id="ij01wgqbwl6j"></a>

userdel -r ali to delete a user (home folder **is deleted**)

Gruppen: einkauf, verkauf

### groupadd <a href="#tmue35bjbqb7" id="tmue35bjbqb7"></a>

groupadd \<name>

groupadd einkauf

groupadd verkauf

less /etc/**group**

We can now see **einkauf** and **verkauf** at the end of this file.

If we press **v** (verbose), the output will be opened directly in the nano editor.

We add the users as shown below:

einkauf:x:1006:ali,albert,gaga

verkauf:x:1007:ahab,anna

cat /etc/group|grep ^einkauf ilgili dosyada einkauf ile baslayan bölümü gösterir.

cat /etc/group|grep verkauf

### groupdel <a href="#pr6s1stft4jo" id="pr6s1stft4jo"></a>

groupdel \<group\_name> if we accidentally created a group or have a typo in the group name.

### id <a href="#id-9uh9qoc0u9tu" id="id-9uh9qoc0u9tu"></a>

id ali shows all the groups that ali belongs to.

### groups <a href="#cbftihdkg914" id="cbftihdkg914"></a>

groups shows all the group names of the active user.

#### groups \<user\_name> <a href="#my0ql47gb4r1" id="my0ql47gb4r1"></a>

groups ali It shows which groups ali is in.

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# mkdir /zugriff

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# mkdir /zugriff/ek

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# mkdir /zugriff/vk

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# ls -l /zugriff/

total 0

drwxr-xr-x. 1 root root 0 Apr 24 12:18 ek

drwxr-xr-x. 1 root root 0 Apr 24 12:18 vk

### chgrp <a href="#abszpfbe6rb9" id="abszpfbe6rb9"></a>

to change the group ownership of a file or directory.

**chgrp \<Gruppe> \<File/DIR>**

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# **chgrp** einkauf /zugriff/ek/

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# chgrp verkauf /zugriff/vk/

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# ls -l /zugriff/

total 0

drwxr-xr-x. 1 root einkauf 0 Apr 24 12:18 ek

drwxr-xr-x. 1 root verkauf 0 Apr 24 12:18 vk

chgrp einkauf /zugriff/ek/ and chown :einkauf /zugriff/ek/ commands are technically identical.

### chmod <a href="#tzs890q5jc0f" id="tzs890q5jc0f"></a>

Change Mode command allows an administrator to set or modify a file's permissions.

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# **chmod g+w,o= /zugriff/\***

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# ls -l /zugriff/

total 0

drwxrwx---. 1 root einkauf 0 Apr 24 12:18 ek

drwxrwx---. 1 root verkauf 0 Apr 24 12:18 vk

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# **chmod a=rwx /data**

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# ls -l /

drwxrwxrwx. 1 root root 10 Apr 24 10:34 data

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# chmod a= /data

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# ls -l /

d---------. 1 root root 10 Apr 24 10:34 data

### Numeric Permissions Notation <a href="#id-7bcdhf8wozud" id="id-7bcdhf8wozud"></a>

| r=4 | w=2 | x=1 | -=0 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# **chmod 777 /data**

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# ls -l /

drwxrwxrwx. 1 root root 10 Apr 24 10:34 data

chmod 755 default

Example:

We have an FTP Server and want students to upload their own files but not read.

Solution: **chmod 730**

3 means group members can write and execute but not read.

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# **chmod 770 /zugriff/\***

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# ls -l /zugriff/

total 0

drwxrwx---. 1 root einkauf 0 Apr 24 12:18 ek

drwxrwx---. 1 root verkauf 0 Apr 24 12:18 vk

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# **su - ali** root, without providing a password, may log in as ali.

ali@fedora:\~$

**su ali**

We switch to /root folder with root user.

ali@fedora:\~$ cd /zugriff/ek/

ali@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ nano ali.txt

ali@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ exit

logout

ali@fedora:/home/ozgur$ exit

exit

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# su - albert

albert@fedora:\~$ cd /zugriff/ek/

albert@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ ls -l

total 4

\-rw-r--r--. 1 ali ali 4 Apr 24 14:01 ali.txt

albert@fedora:/zugriff/ek$

albert@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ **rm ali.txt**

rm: remove write-protected regular file 'ali.txt'? **y**

albert@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ ls -l

total 0

### Special Permissions <a href="#cigqxc595nxi" id="cigqxc595nxi"></a>

4 SUID (Set User ID)

2 SGID (Set Group ID)

1 Sticky-Bit

#### SUID (Set-user-ID) <a href="#id-3e3ftni91kp0" id="id-3e3ftni91kp0"></a>

In Linux by default when a user executes a file, The file gets executed with the privileges of the user who executes it. If we set SUID(set-user-ID) bit on the executable this behavior can be changed, then the file will always run with privileges of the owner of the file, no matter who runs the executable.

Note: Only owner of the file or root can set the SUID bit

chmod u+s \<file\_name> or

chmod 4724 \<file\_name>

chmod u-s \<file\_name> to remove the permission.

#### SGID (Set-group-ID) <a href="#umou26rm885q" id="umou26rm885q"></a>

**Set-group-ID bit on a file**

Set-group-ID (SGID) is similar to SUID except that an executable with SGID bit set runs with the privileges of the group which owns the file.

chmod g+s \<file\_name> or

chmod 2755 \<file\_name>

chmod g-s \<file\_name> to remove the permission.

**Set-group-ID bit on a directory**

When set-group-ID (SGID) bit is set directory, all newly created subdirectories/files under the directory will inherit the same group ownership as of the directory itself. If the SGID bit is not set then all newly created files will have a group as the user’s default group.

#### Sticky-Bit(!) <a href="#g1t02utm635o" id="g1t02utm635o"></a>

If the sticky bit on a directory is set, subdirectories/Files under that directory can only be deleted by either the owner of the file, owner of the directory, or the root user. This special permission is useful to prevent users from deleting another user’s file inside a shared folder where everyone has read, write, and execute access.

chmod o+**t** /zugriff/ek/ or

chmod **1**770 /zugriff/ek/

chmod o-**t** /zugriff/ek/ to remove the permission

albert@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ **exit**

logout

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# **chmod 1770 /zugriff/\***

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# **ls -l /zugriff/**

total 0

drwxrwx--**T**. 1 root einkauf 0 Apr 24 14:10 ek

drwxrwx--**T**. 1 root verkauf 0 Apr 24 12:18 vk

**T**: others don’t have x permission

**t**: others have x permission

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# su - ali

ali@fedora:\~$ cd /zugriff/ek/

ali@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ nano ali.txt

ali@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ ls -l

total 4

\-rw-r--r--. 1 ali ali 7 Apr 24 14:19 ali.txt

ali@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ exit

logout

root@fedora:/home/ozgur# su - albert

albert@fedora:\~$ cd /zugriff/ek/

albert@fedora:/zugriff/ek$ rm ali.txt

rm: remove write-protected regular file 'ali.txt'? y

rm: cannot remove 'ali.txt': Operation not permitted
